CLOUDP-230380: Improve Release documentation (#1537)
mongodb/mongodb-atlas-kubernetes: docs/dev/release.md

# Atlas Operator Release Instructions

For the various PRs involved, seek at least someone else to approve. In case of doubts, engage the team member(s) who might be able to clarify and seek their review as well.

## Create the release branch

Use the GitHub UI to create the new "Create Release Branch" workflow. Specify the version to be released in the text box.
The deployment scripts (K8s configs, OLM bundle) will be generated and PR will be created with new changes on behalf
of the `github-actions` bot.

Pass the version with the `X.Y.Z` eg. `1.2.3`, **without** the `v...` prefix.

See [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting) in case of issues, such as [errors with the major version](#major-version-issues-when-create-release-branch).

## Approve the Pull Request named "Release x.y.z"

Review the Pull Request. Approve and merge it to `main`.
The new job "Create Release" will be triggered and the following will be done:
* Atlas Operator image is built and pushed to DockerHub
* Draft Release will be created with all commits since the previous release

> Once the Pull Request is approved, a tag is created out of the branch, so such branch could be discarded. A branch `release/X.Y.Z` turns into tag `vX.Y.Z`, and `pre-release/X.Y.Z-...` into `vX.Y.Z-...`. The `tag.yml` workflow is the one responsible for creating a tag from the branch closed, and triggering the release process workflow (`release-post-merge.yml`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "Create Release Branch" workflow is going to create a Pull Request pointing to a `release/X.Y.Z` branch. Once approved and merged, automation is going to create a `vX.Y.Z` tag.
```
I wouldn't mention `tag.yml`. It confuses the person who is doing the release. The statement:
```
The `tag.yml` workflow is the one responsible for creating a tag from the branch closed, and triggering the release process workflow (`release-post-merge.yml`).
```
is rather suited to be placed in the separate markdown which is documenting GitHub actions.

## Edit the Release Notes and publish the release

> Follow the format described in the [release-notes-template.md](../release-notes/release-notes-template.md) file. Publish the release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the format described in the [release-notes-template.md](../release-notes/release-notes-template.md) file. Before publishing the release, keep the release in Draft and get an approval from the team and Product Management.
```

### Fork/Update the community operators repositories

**Note**: this has to be done once only. 

First ensure your SSH keys in [https://github.com/settings/keys] are authorized for `mongodb-forks` MongoDB SSO.

> Then, from your usual directory holding your git repository copies, do the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Execute the following steps:
```

export RH_CERTIFIED_OPENSHIFT_REPO_PATH=$PWD/certified-operators
```

> ### Before creating PRs against RedHat repositories

Reviewer: This should be in a `### Prerequisites` section at the beginning of the document.

Author: Moved

> To get PRs to be auto-committed for RedHat community & Openshift you need to make sure you are listed in the [team members ci.yaml list (community-operators)](https://github.com/k8s-operatorhub/community-operators/blob/main/operators/mongodb-atlas-kubernetes/ci.yaml). Link for [community-operators-prod](https://github.com/redhat-openshift-ecosystem/community-operators-prod/blob/main/operators/mongodb-atlas-kubernetes/ci.yaml). This is not a requirement for [Certified Operators](https://github.com/redhat-openshift-ecosystem/certified-operators/blob/main/operators/mongodb-atlas-kubernetes/ci.yaml).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get PRs to be auto-committed for RedHat community & Openshift you need to make sure you are listed in the [team members ci.yaml list for community-operators](https://github.com/k8s-operatorhub/community-operators/blob/main/operators/mongodb-atlas-kubernetes/ci.yaml) and [team members ci.yaml list for community-operators-prod](https://github.com/redhat-openshift-ecosystem/community-operators-prod/blob/main/operators/mongodb-atlas-kubernetes/ci.yaml).

This is not required for [Certified Operators](https://github.com/redhat-openshift-ecosystem/certified-operators/blob/main/operators/mongodb-atlas-kubernetes/ci.yaml).
```

> All this is in addition to holding a RedHat Connect account adn being a [team member with org administrator role in the team list](https://connect.redhat.com/account/team-members), which is part of the *team onboarding*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, make sure you have a "RedHat Connect" account and are a [team member with org administrator role in the team list](https://connect.redhat.com/account/team-members).
```

After the PR is approved it will soon appear in the [Atlas Operator openshift cluster](https://console-openshift-console.apps.atlas.operator.mongokubernetes.com)

# SSDLC checklist publishing

For the time being, preparing the SSDLC checklist for each release is a manual process. Use this [past PR as a starting point](https://github.com/mongodb/mongodb-atlas-kubernetes/pull/1524).

Copy the closest [sdlc-compliance.md](../releases/v2.2.1/sdlc-compliance.md) file and:
- Update the **version** references to the one being released.

> - Update dates and release creators to match the reality of the current release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Update dates and release creators of the current release.
```

> - Usually no more changes will be needed. Only if you actually skipped some CI check, like allowed the release to happen even when some report flagged a dependency that had no fix yet, you might need to mention such case.

Reviewer: This sentence is confusing for the reader. Let's shorten this to the minimum or leave out.

Author: OK
```suggestion
```

Reviewer: ok, lgtm

> There is no need to make any changes about the image signature part other than updating the instructions to the current version.

Reviewer: What does that mean concretely?
```suggestion
Update the image signature instructions to match the current version.
```

> For SBOMs, you will have to *generate* the files and place them in the same directory as the compliance doc `docs/releases/vX.Y.Z`, with the expected names; `linux-amd64.sbom.json` & `linux-arm64.sbom.json`. To generate each f the files you need to run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generate the `linux-amd64.sbom.json` and `linux-arm64.sbom.json` SBOM files and place them in the same directory as the compliance doc `docs/releases/vX.Y.Z`:
```

```shell
docker sbom --platform "linux/${arch}" -o "docs/releases/v${version}/linux-${arch}.sbom.json" --format "cyclonedx-json" "$image"
```

Where:
- `${arch}` is the architecture to generate, either `amd64` or `arm64`.
- `${version}` is the current version released in `X.Y.Z` format, without the **v** prefix.
- `${image}` is the image reference released, usually something like `mongodb/mongodb-atlas-kubernetes-operator:${version}`.

> Once all such information is in place, create a PR with it and merge it as close to the release as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a PR with the following new files included in the `releases/vX.Y.Z` directory:
- `linux-amd64.sbom.json`
- `linux-arm64.sbom.json`
- `sdlc-compliance.md`
```

```

If the release is a new minor version, then the CLI must be updated with the new version (and any new CRDs) [here](https://github.com/mongodb/mongodb-atlas-cli/blob/master/internal/kubernetes/operator/features/crds.go).

## Troubleshooting

> ### Major version issues when Create Release Branch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Major version issues when executing the "Create Release Branch" workflow
```
